It's been suggested that during this period,
while you were at the Hydrographic Office, that
research and development oceanography was
directed by or divided up, if I may use that word,
between Ewing, Islin, and Revell. That they sort
of are working on plotting, as it were, of
expanding oceanography. Would you agree with
that? You're talking... I'm talking about 46, 47,
and 48, when Scripps and Woods Hole and O&R began to
think about what the future of oceanography is.
Yes, I think that's probably a pretty fair
statement. They certainly exerted a lot of
influence in the Washington area.
And
I think it's hard in a way
for me to recall too much what was happening at the
institutions at that time, because I wasn't
there. I wasn't in any of them. I was in Washington.
And I think it was really to kind of stabilize after
the war and get things on what we looked at as more or
less stable footing. There was, if I can go off on a
tangent here for a moment, I showed you this
morning this book by Vaughan, which I have called
NASCO I. NASCO is a term that came in later, but this
was one of the early attempts of the National
Academy of Sciences to look at the state of marine
sciences in this country, which occurred in the
1920s. although that book of wants was not
published until essentially ten years later. But
there was another National Academy committee set
up at about the time you're talking about, and I
can't remember it exactly, at which Scripps,
Woods Hole, and so on, were asked essentially what
they thought they wanted to do. And I can't recall
any of the content, but there is a small
publication resulting from that committee. And
the only part of it I can recall at all was that
Professor Thompson, who was then director of what
were known as the Oceanographic Laboratories at
the University of Washington, his chief emphasis
that he just wanted to return to the pre-war
status, which I thought was singularly
unimaginative, as I remember. But yes, I think
that
it was pretty much dominated by Woods Hole
scripts. And then Lamont came on the scene, I
guess, about that time. And then there was this
flurry of establishment of essentially new
laboratories. Chesapeake Bay Institute, Texas
A&M in particular come to mind here, and there were
several others, as I recall. What sort of fellow
was Islin? What was he like? Well, I think I,
although I was never sort of spent very much time at
Woods Hole and so on, apparently I knew more about
him and a lot of his people that more or less lived
with him, in that he was very much sort of a lone wolf
in a way, although he was quite outgoing in
meetings and conferences and so on. His private
life was something which was very much his own, and
he lived on Martha's Vineyard and later on near
Boston, I think it was in Newton. I'm one of the few
people who's ever been a house guest at the S-Lens
as far as I know, and I don't know quite why. But
he was a real sort of a puzzle to me in a way because he
was
very imaginative in many ways, and very
farsighted in looking ahead and so on. In fact, I
was just thinking the other day that some of the
things he said to me at the time I thought were
silly, and which I now look back on and see that he
was just about 10 or 20 years ahead of anybody else
and things. However, I always felt that he was in a
sense, anti-intellectual, which sounds kind of
snobbish here, but his own background was only, I
think, up to the level of a bachelor's degree, and
his degree, I think, was actually in
anthropology. In other words, he didn't have a
very strong sort of scientific background on
which to build, and he tended to look for similar
types of people in many cases who were interested,
but I would consider in a sense not scientifically
qualified. Now, he made me a liar in a number of
cases here, in that some of these people that he had
joined Woods Hole, an organization that turned
out to be very outstanding, but I would venture
that the sort of general average was not too good.
And one of the great deficiencies I felt at Woods
Hole was that they never sincerely sought, I'm
talking of the era when Islin was there, but it
tended to carry on after he'd retired. was they
never really supported an educational program
either at Woods Hole or anywhere else. They were
very, very much out of research oriented here. And
it was only when I think
it was Admiral Smith in particular later on saw
certain advantages which could be achieved in
terms of money by becoming an educational
institution. They sort of switched in that
direction. But I don't think they've ever really
taken it very seriously. That's my sort of point
here. And
so I asked
Columbus one day. how do you recruit your people?
And he said, oh, I don't worry about that. I have
enough nice young men come knocking on my door. I
never have to go looking for people. And I think
this was true in many cases. They were nice young
men, in the best sense of the word. What about
Ewing? Oh, Ewing is an entrepreneur, obviously,
and very aggressive, very different, entirely
different. It was very
tremendously hardworking and
broadly interested and
very much the entrepreneur, as I said, capable of
interesting people, raising money, getting
things going, and so on. I think with a good eye in
most cases for people that he hired to work with
him, the main
sort of reservation I have about Ewing as I used to
identify him, he was a cream skimmer. He'd get an
idea, do enough work on it to sort of meet his
particular interest at the moment, sometimes
correctly, sometimes I think misinterpreting
things, and then he'd move on to something else and
leave it to other people to kind of come along and
clean up sometimes the mess I think he left behind
him in the sense. But I think we can, in a field such
as this, we can always and should consider
ourselves fortunate to have some people like
that. We don't want everybody to be Morris Ewing.
That same charge has been leveled against
Revelle. Would you agree with that? Well, Revelle
has switched around a great deal, and
yet I think Again, it's hard to make offhand kind of
judgments and evaluations, but his interests
were clearly much broader than Ewing's. And I
think it's fair to say that Ravel had, in a sense, an
altruistic interest in many of these things,
although they redounded to his glory in a way. But I
think Ewing's concerns were always, as things
affected Ewing. And I can't imagine Ewing getting
involved in these programs in India and so on.
Pakistan has rebelled it, or Ewing going
to Harvard has rebelled it and entering an
entirely new sort of field here. And so there's
really very major differences i think between
them now we know it's almost as if in you know let's
say about 48 or 49 right before you decide to come to
washington it's almost as if the onr says uh look we
there's not enough oceanographers to suit the
needs and what we've got to do is move out and not
only establish departments of oceanography but
establish particularly kinds of departments of
oceanography uh We need, for example, chemical
oceanographers, and where should that be, and
what should it be? We need people to work on the Gulf
Coast, and what should they do, and what should
they be? Would you agree with that? Yes, I think
my... I haven't thought about these things for so
long, and dates and events and so on are getting
confused, but there was the...
this sort of regionalism, yes, that we ought to
spot places in appropriate coastal regions. And
there was nothing in the Gulf of Mexico and so on.
And then this Chesapeake Bay development came up,
which was really, I think, possibly brought into
being as much as anything else, but the fact that
ONR was willing to put some money into it, although
it was, as I recall, sort of a tripartite
arrangement at first of Maryland, Virginia, and
ONR. And that was thought of as a center for sort of
looking at large bays and estuaries. And so it was
partly regional, partly sort of subject matter. I
don't really recall any
strong impetus really towards sort of training
programs, although they obviously came along
with this in a way. ONR is always in the rather
difficult position that they were not supposed to
support education as such, and so it was often
done, but it was budgeted for in essentially other
terms here.
They certainly wanted to help here, and
the
Dr. Thompson was the director of what were then
known as the Oceanographic Laboratories, which
had existed since about 1930 when the Rockefeller
money was available and the laboratories were set
up. And there was some teaching prior to the war,
some local sort of work at sea with a very small
vessel which was actually sold by the university
during the war, so there was no vessel left here.
When Dr. Thompson came back to the university
after the war, he had a commission in the chemical
warfare branch of the Army. He tried to pick up the
pieces and sort of reestablish a program here and
found it very difficult because a lot of the people
had moved away or died or got other interests.
There was no vessel here and so on. So he was really
faced with a real problem. And the first thing that
essentially the ONR did here was provide a little
money to essentially get a small vessel going
again and to support a few people.
you know, as I indicated a while ago, kind of get it
going a little bit as it had been 10 years
previously. And so when I came out here, ONR
support was about $100,000 a year, and that was
essentially the only support available. it was
available on a, it was really a kind of block
funding, and it was out of this we began to develop
the programs here. So, yes, I think it was a
deliberate effort of O.N.R. to try and
proliferate,
but I think in many cases, if the
availability of funds for some of these newer
institutions and trying to get the University of
Washington back in business again was
essentially as long as it didn't interfere too
much with the funding of Scripps and Woods Hole,
which may sound like sour grapes, but I think that
in a way this was a sub-situation. Who made contact
with you to come out here? I don't know exactly what
happened, but the man on the faculty or in the
administration here who contacted me was the dean
of the College of Arts and Sciences, Dean Lloyd
Woodburn. And
I don't know whether I'd been suggested by Tommy
Thompson or just have,
They had realized, and I think this is sort of worth
noting, that they couldn't go back to the kind of
pre-war operations, that something had to be done
here that would change the thing. And in the spring
of 1951, the
Board of Regents, which is our governing body,
decided I'm sure it was on the recommendation of
Dean Woodburn to create a department of
oceanography in the College of Arts and Sciences,
which then just changed the emphasis away from a
sort of a research activity towards an
educational activity and made it entirely
appropriate to go into sort of undergraduate as
well as graduate education. There were two sort of
separate entities here at the university, which
had been operated before the war and had returned
to this sort of situation after the war.
Both of them operated under this general title of
the Oceanographic Laboratories, plural. And one
was a facility at the Friday Harbor on the San Juan
Islands, which is a field station type thing, and
the building that had been erected on the main
campus here, which, with Rockville money, which
you have to go and have a look at while you're here,
it's hidden by the other edifice here now. These
two things were operated jointly under Professor
Thompson, and when I came out here, the assumption
was that I would operate both of them. But for a
variety of reasons, it seemed much better to me to
operate them separately. But I was not only—I was
called executive officer of the Department of
Oceanography and director of the Freddie Harbor
Laboratories. And I had these two jobs, in effect,
for some seven years, I think it was. And then
someone else took over as director at the Freddie
Harbor Laboratories. But I had dual jobs here. As I
mentioned earlier, I got into administration of
one kind during the war, administration of
another kind in Washington. I came out here and I
got into still another kind of administration. So
in many respects, I haven't been a research
scientist for a long, long time here. And it was
more by accident than I think by choice. When you
came to the west to visit the dean, what did he tell
you? What about the Department of Oceanography he
wanted you to find? Oh, I think that
I had fairly fairly
strong ideas at that time about what I thought I
wanted to do. And part of it had come out of some
deliberations that had gone on, and I can't really
remember at the moment who prompted them, whether
it was ONR or some other agency. We'd had a number of
meetings on essentially education in
oceanography, and there was a paper that was
finally published, and I think it was in Science,
if I remember correctly, by Redfield and I think
Revell and several others, sort of setting out
what they felt the curriculum in oceanography
ought to be. And this was part of what I sort of had in
mind when I came out here. In other words, I wasn't
operating entirely on my own hunches here. There
was some agreement, in a sense, as to what might be
done. Now, what was different here was the
opportunity to get into the undergraduate
program.
It took us about a year, I think, to develop
sort of program courses and so forth that we
thought we could start with. And
we had our first students, I guess, in about 1952.
Now, this
is, in effect, now the first institution of
undergraduate oceanography in the country and
possibly in the world. So, what sort of students
did you look for?
Well, I don't know whether we looked for a
particular kind of students, because students
kind of come to you in a case like this. What we felt,
and I think correctly, was that we were offering
them a sort of an interesting field. But more
particularly, an opportunity for students. It
obviously is science oriented, and in a sense
here, basically science oriented, a basic
science orientation. A
field where the student could be a kind of a
scientific generalist rather than a specialist.
And I've always felt that way and I feel it even more
so today that I'm not saying it's the kind of
program that should be available for for
everybody, or it really shouldn't displace the
kind of specialist programs. But I think there
should be opportunities at all levels for
students who have an inclination towards being
broad and being generalists,
interdisciplinary, and these various other
terms that are used. There should be some
opportunities for that. And this is essentially
what we started out with this in mind. sort of
things we had in mind was to prepare people really
for jobs in agencies such as hydrographic office
and other government and state agencies who
needed people. The other institutions at that
time were all postgraduate, and really all they
were interested in were doctoral people, so they
were They were training all the generals, but they
didn't have any Indians to go along with them. And I
felt that not very glamorous, but certainly a need
that I thought we could meet. And I think we did
fairly well. The original sort of concept was that
all the students would go through a similar sort of
curriculum, but this only lasted for a relatively
few years. And then we began increasing in
numbers, and the research program increased, and
there were more faculty and so forth. And I found I
was essentially fighting a losing battle here,
because all of the as we used to call them in the
department, physical, chemical, biological,
geological, and somewhat more recently
geophysical, all wanted to have their own sort of
programs. So this idea of a kind of a basic common
undergraduate preparation gave way to, again,
more specialized optional programs in these sort
of five fields. And I got out of sorts with this as
the years went by. I think there's a swing in the
other direction now, and they're beginning to
feel that maybe there is some merit to having
people with sort of broad training again. But it's
taken 20 years or so for the pendulum to swing, and
it hasn't moved very far in that direction. When
you started choosing faculty, what sort of
faculty did you look for? This is more or less kind
of parallel to the students. There's no one to look
for.
When
I came out here, Professor Thompson, who was a
chemist and chemical oceanographer, Cliff
Barnes, who was originally a chemist but more so a
physical oceanographer, Morris Rattray, who had
come in as of just finishing his PhD from Caltech,
who was a theoretical hydrodynamicist, and
myself. I think that was about it. We had really
nobody in the geological area, nobody in the
biological area. And so part of my job was to
obviously try and find some people in these two
sort of fields. And it turned out to be just as hard
as it had been during the war and back in the
Hydrographic Office to find anybody to go into
these areas. And
the first geological oceanographer I was able to
add to the faculty was Howard Gould, who's now a and
has been for a number of years with the Humble
Research Laboratories in Houston. And he spent
several years with us and then felt he wanted more
money and so on, so he went to Humble. And the next
geologist I recruited was Joe Krager, who was a
brand new PhD out of Texas A&M. He was one of the very
first of the PhDs. But these people had very little
sort of experience themselves. I mean, they were,
as the most recent PhDs, and they had to, in a sense,
learn a lot on the job here. Not as far as this sort of
research, I'm not saying that, but from a teaching
point of view. The biologists turned out to be
almost equally hard to find anybody who had who was
not strictly a sort of a biologist, but had some of
the interests of what I would identify as a
biological oceanographer, which meant some
other background. And
this turned out to be, as they say, just as hard to
find anybody there. And this has more or less
persisted I think even up to today. And one of the
things that strikes me all the time is that you can
clearly find research people these days. Often,
however, with really very narrow kind of
preparation, but very few of them with any kind of
teaching experience. Maybe one of our
contributions here has been the fact that an awful
lot of graduate students have been teaching
assistants here, a kind of experience they never
got in any of the other places, and do go out of here,
not all of them, but a good many of them, with some
kind of feeling about what the teaching job is. How
are you doing?